# Question 2.2 #

Discuss the main categories of data models. What are the basic differences
among the relational model, the object model, and the XML model?

# Answer #

- **Relational model**: The relational data model represents a database as a collection of tables,
where each table can be stored as a separate file. Most relational databases use the high-level
query language called SQL and support a limited form of user views

- **Object model**: defines a database in terms of objects, their properties, and
their operations. Objects with the same structure and behavior belong to a class,
and classes are organized into hierarchies (or acyclic graphs). The operations of each class are specified in terms of predefined procedures called methods. Relational DBMSs have been extending their models to incorporate object database
concepts and other capabilities; these systems are referred to as object-relational or
extended relational systems.

- **XML model**: The XML model has emerged as a standard for exchanging data over the Web and
has been used as a basis for implementing several prototype native XML systems.
XML uses hierarchical tree structures. It combines database concepts with concepts
from document representation models. Data is represented as elements; with the
use of tags, data can be nested to create complex tree structures. This model conceptually resembles the object model but uses different terminology. XML capabilities have been added to many commercial DBMS products