# Question 2.5 #

What is the difference between logical data independence and physical data
independence? Which one is harder to achieve? Why?

# Answer #

- **Logical data independence** is the capacity to change the conceptual schema
without having to change external schemas or application programs. We
may change the conceptual schema to expand the database (by adding a
record type or data item), to change constraints, or to reduce the database
(by removing a record type or data item). In the last case, external schemas
that refer only to the remaining data should not be affected. Only the view definition and the mappings need to
be changed in a DBMS that supports logical data independence. After the
conceptual schema undergoes a logical reorganization, application programs that reference the external schema constructs must work as before.
Changes to constraints can be applied to the conceptual schema without
affecting the external schemas or application programs.

- **Physical data independence** is the capacity to change the internal schema
without having to change the conceptual schema. Hence, the external schemas need not be changed as well. Changes to the internal schema may be
needed because some physical files were reorganized—for example, by creating additional access structures—to improve the performance of retrieval
or update. If the same data as before remains in the database, we should not
have to change the conceptual schema.

- Generally, physical data independence exists in most databases and file environments where physical details, such as the exact location of data on disk, and hardware details of storage encoding, placement, compression, splitting, merging of
records, and so on are hidden from the user. Applications remain unaware of these
details. On the other hand, logical data independence is harder to achieve because it
allows structural and constraint changes without affecting application programs—a
much stricter requirement.
